Add Tests and Demos about "Sensitive Data Stored Unencrypted via DataStore" (#3540)
OWASP/mastg: tests-beta/android/MASVS-STORAGE/MASTG-TEST-0305.md

---
platform: android
title: Static Analysis for Unencrypted Sensitive Data in DataStore

> id: MASTG-TEST-0305

Reviewer: Use a temporal ID to avoid drifts

type: [static]
weakness: MASWE-0006
best-practices: [MASTG-BEST-0025]
profiles: [L2]
status: new
---

## Overview

> This test verifies whether the app's code uses Jetpack DataStore APIs to store sensitive data — such as tokens, passwords, or PII — without encryption. By default, both Preferences DataStore (`.preferences_pb`) and Proto DataStore (`.proto`) persist data in plaintext.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test verifies whether the app's code uses [Jetpack DataStore](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/datastore) APIs to store sensitive data — such as tokens, passwords, or PII — without encryption. By default, both Preferences DataStore (`.preferences_pb`) and Proto DataStore (`.proto`) persist data in plaintext.
```

## Steps

1. Obtain the application package (APK) using @MASTG-TECH-0003.

2. Use static analysis (@MASTG-TECH-0014) to review code for calls to DataStore APIs, including:
   - `androidx.datastore.preferences.preferencesDataStore`
   - `androidx.datastore.core.DataStore` or usage of generated Proto classes
   - `dataStore.edit`, `updateData`, or `write` operations

3. Inspect whether:
   - sensitive data is stored using default, unencrypted DataStore,
   - no encryption layer (e.g., `EncryptedFile.Builder` for Preferences DataStore or encrypted custom serializer for Proto DataStore) is applied to sensitive fields.

## Observation

- Identify DataStore files referenced in the code.

> - Determine whether sensitive data is stored without encryption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Whether encryption is being applied in the code to the sensitive data before being stored.
```
